---
title: "Multi 3.0: Codesigning, dynamic libraries, and macOS notifications"
category: blog

---

[Multi](https://github.com/kofigumbs/multi) is a macOS app for creating native wrappers around your favorite websites.
Since Multi apps use Apple's WebKit engine, they are generally less resource-intensive than their Electron equivalents.
The Multi runtime also connects web platform APIs to macOS native widgets, like notifications—the little feature that turned the 3.0 release into a complete rewrite.

Prior to this release, Multi used the deprecated `NSUserNotification` to show banner alerts.
These APIs still seem to work OK, but fixing some of the long-standing GitHub issues would have required me to invest further into a sinking ship.
I figured migrating to the newer `UNNotification` might magically solve some of those issues, but even if it didn't I'd still be in a better position for researching solutions.
At a surface level the APIs work similarly, and it was simple to get the new code compiling;
but when I went to test my Multi app, no notifications appeared.

Eventually I discovered that `UNUserNotificationCenter` automatically denies notification permission requests unless the app is codesigned.
This restriction was a problem for Multi because `codesign` requires that an apps bundle contains no references to external artifacts.
In the old architecture, creating a Multi app would add a symlink in the place where macOS expected the main executable.
That symlink pointed to an executable runtime within Multi itself, which meant that updating Multi automatically updates any wrapper apps.
`codesign` complains (rightfully so) with this setup since the executable artifact lives outside of the signed bundle.

The solution: I now ship the runtime as a dynamic library instead of an executable, and Multi wrapper apps contain a small initializer binary that loads it.
`codesign` is happy because the resulting bundle is statically self-contained.
And users are happy because updating Multi still updates behavior in existing wrapper apps.
The initializer binary itself should only need to change if I've done something tragically wrong in [these 10 lines of Swift](https://github.com/kofigumbs/multi/blob/main/Sources/MultiStub/main.swift).
